Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: happens.
Jerry Michalski: My apologies, I forgot to turn on the recorder. This is the OGM Weekly Call on Thursday, September 11th, 9-11, 2025. Go ahead, Gil.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: So, to Scott's provocation of… I remember it as him wondering whether collaboration ever happens, not whether it ever succeeds, and it seems to me fairly obvious that it happens all the time and always has.
Jerry Michalski: Oh, I was puzzled by his definition of collaboration. He seemed… he seemed perhaps to be holding the word in a different way than I'm holding it, and maybe others of us are holding it, and I was really curious what he meant by it.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Could you tell us both of those ways?
Jerry Michalski: I don't want to speak for him. I was trying to channel him when I wrote the invite, but I'm not sure. Kevin, please.
Kevin Jones: Yeah, I talked to him about it, because we're starting to do something together with John Warner related to Plex, and his definition of collaboration is.
Kevin Jones: When two different groups with their own goals collaborate on something, that…
Kevin Jones: Doesn't divert them from what they're doing.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Hmm.
Kevin Jones: And I said, well, you know, I'm working on…
Kevin Jones: affordable housing in Swannonoa, and I've got, like, 5 different groups working on that one thing from different perspectives. One is getting a… got a grant from Gates for a third place, because we don't have any
Kevin Jones: place people can gather anymore. There's no supermarket, there's no restaurant, there's no post office, there's no fire, there's… well, there's… there's no, hardware, you know, there's nothing where people can gather. So a third place as a place to then work on housing. And so there's lots of different groups working on that problem.
Kevin Jones: He said, no, what I mean is groups that are
Kevin Jones: having their own goals and finding a way to bridge that. And I said, yeah, I've never… I've always… I've done that a lot, and you get…
Kevin Jones: you know, Barney, I like you, you like me, but nobody changes from their own goals. Occasionally, it's like you have ships going by, and you can lower a drawbridge from each ship to the other, and you get a little bit across, but nobody…
Kevin Jones: you know, if they've got a goal going that way, and you've got a goal going that way, it does… to me, it doesn't happen, and that… but that's what he was thinking, that…
Kevin Jones: Groups with their own purpose would collaborate on something between them in some way, and
Kevin Jones: I just have not ever seen it. The way he's talking about it.
Jerry Michalski: Sounds like a pretty… a pretty narrow definition of collaboration. It's,
Jerry Michalski: groups with cross missions or something like that. I'm reminded, I think I told this story on an OGM call long ago, but in Management 101,
Jerry Michalski: We had the Ugly Oranges negotiation case.
Jerry Michalski: And the class was divided in two, each half got the case, and basically the situation is there is a shipment of the last available ugly oranges on the planet. They are unique oranges, special characteristics, and you need to buy
Jerry Michalski: the shipment of oranges. You have a $1 million budget, no more, no more than a million dollars. You have to buy the shipment. There's another group that you know is coming, competing, because they also want to buy the oranges, so you gotta figure out, you need… you need the pith of the peel to make a serum that's going to cure cancer.
Jerry Michalski: And I'm gonna completely spoil the plot. The other team needs the juice of the oranges.
Jerry Michalski: And it's up to the negotiation to figure out… they could pay a buck for the shipment and spend $999,999 on research.
Jerry Michalski: and just split the oranges, because they don't need the same thing from the oranges. So it was really enlightening, because it made you investigate any negotiation and go, what the heck is it that we want or need? Like, it's a very nice, memorable case to illustrate, like.
Jerry Michalski: Sometimes people that look like they're in great contention, because the negotiation typically gets really contentious really fast, because they both think they need all of the oranges.
Jerry Michalski: Anyway, back…
Mike Nelson: Curiosity, was the juice for something spectacular, like carrying cancer, or was it just to quench my thirst?
Jerry Michalski: No, I think it's… I think it's always like curing cancer or some… some big noble goal. You know, that's part of it. And I think the… I'll look it up in my brain. I'm pretty sure the Ugly Oranges case is chronicled online.
Jerry Michalski: And very, very findable, so I'll put a link to it in a sec.
Jerry Michalski: But off to you, Mike.
Mike Nelson: I was intrigued by his question, too, and confused.
Mike Nelson: I thought the focus was more on individuals collaborating, or small groups.
Mike Nelson: in different organizations collaborating, so… so maybe, maybe what Kevin said and what I'm thinking are consistent. But, the skepticism I heard was, at the end of the day.
Mike Nelson: Somebody kind of makes critical decisions about what goes forward.
Mike Nelson: And… and so it… it… the idea of some…
Mike Nelson: Melding of the minds, and this new organism is now doing things that could not be done individually, that we sometimes talk about.
Mike Nelson: is something we probably should be skeptical about. I've heard so many cases where, you know, 5 people go, oh, let's all collaborate on this, and in the end.
Mike Nelson: One person does 80% of the work, and four people take all the credit, you know? And actually, some of those 4 people are actually getting in the way, and making silly suggestions, and delaying the process.
Mike Nelson: So, I think in the end, you need a champion… oh, here's Scott, he can describe what's going on.
Jerry Michalski: I'm good.
Mike Nelson: But the… the fact that… that…
Mike Nelson: We should all be skeptical of collaboration for collaboration's sake.
Mike Nelson: And we should all understand that at the end of the day.
Mike Nelson: Different people need to take on different responsibilities, and most likely.
Mike Nelson: The most important thing you get is a deadline and somebody who has a real motivation to get it done.
Mike Nelson: Because otherwise, collaborations can wander and wander and wander, and as Kevin said.
Mike Nelson: different groups can push it in different directions and avoid consensus. But Scott, we're debating your thesis without you here. Yes. I'm glad you're here.
Scott Moehring: I'm sorry I'm late, I'm… as you probably all have guessed, I'm…
Scott Moehring: I'm usually working while I'm doing these calls, so… so I, you know, I've managed to get off the…
Scott Moehring: other stuff for a moment to come and talk with you about my odd thoughts about collaboration.
Scott Moehring: So, the meme that I pulled up is Enigo Montoya, you keep using that word. I don't think that means what you think that means.
Scott Moehring: And that's been a theme of mine, is when I hear, especially in organizational culture, I hear a lot of words that I think
Scott Moehring: what does that mean? Well, we need to communicate. You know, it's like, okay, well, let's talk about what that means. So, for me, collaboration.
Scott Moehring: What I started to notice was that…
Scott Moehring: It seemed to be used synonymously with, let's get together and work.
Scott Moehring: And, actually, the root of it was…
Scott Moehring: work together. Collaboration is from the Latin two words that mean work together, and I thought.
Scott Moehring: Ostensibly, that means anytime two or more people are doing something, that means it's collaboration. And I thought.
Scott Moehring: I don't think that's how we're using it.
Scott Moehring: Like, I don't think that when I say I want to collaborate with someone, that that just means you and I are going to work on something together. And the best example that I came up with in the last 24 hours was a restaurant.
Scott Moehring: I consider… The head chef and the restaurateur to have a collaboration.
Scott Moehring: In developing the restaurant and the menu, and the experience.
Scott Moehring: I do not consider the kitchen, day-to-day, where they are executing the recipes that have already been created to be a collaborative environment.
Scott Moehring: I consider that teamwork.
Scott Moehring: Everyone has a role, there's a set plan, and I know that we love our distinctions, right? So, I'm throwing this out as a hypothesis, that there's a difference between collaboration and teamwork.
Scott Moehring: And…
Scott Moehring: I've been thinking one of the ways I can get to it is the idea of a collaboration. Collaboration as a noun.
Scott Moehring: Which, to me, Is an end result created by unique individuals Pairing up or grouping up.
Scott Moehring: And that if you change the individuals, you fundamentally change the collaboration.
Scott Moehring: Which is not true with teamwork.
Scott Moehring: We can take one person out, put another person in, and the role, if they're doing the same role, is a bucket brigade. And we absolutely need teamwork.
Scott Moehring: Someone's in charge, someone sets the vision, and we… we all fulfill our role. With a collaboration, we typically name the individuals, name the organizations, because they are unique.
Scott Moehring: And if you take one out.
Scott Moehring: and put another one in, it's a different thing. So my thought is, I have rarely seen, and I'll be done in just a second here.
Scott Moehring: I've rarely seen what I consider true collaboration, which is a couple of minds getting together.
Scott Moehring: With a shared vision, who creates something that they couldn't create separately, not because of… Manpower, but because…
Scott Moehring: Of the unique interaction of those two individuals.
Scott Moehring: I think we talk about collaboration, but we really are saying teamwork.
Scott Moehring: But my observation has been that most of the time, it's one person's vision.
Scott Moehring: And other people are getting on board.
Scott Moehring: As opposed to two people coming together and saying.
Scott Moehring: We're making something that we both Have the same vision on.
Scott Moehring: And my test has been
Scott Moehring: If the people who are collaborating can't say what they're doing in the same way.
Scott Moehring: Maybe they're not actually collaborating.
Jerry Michalski: So…
Jerry Michalski: Scott, thank you very much for deepening that. So I think, from what you just said, that the Hollywood movie-making mechanism, where a bunch of people come together, one of whom is the gaffer and the best boy and the grip and all that.
Jerry Michalski: that that is teamwork, but not collaboration, because each of those people have an assigned role, they all know exactly what that role is, and they are plug-and-playable. Is that right?
Scott Moehring: That is, that is correct.
Jerry Michalski: However, if the director is Mike Lee.
Jerry Michalski: who relies on his collaboration with the actors to invent the script as they come together into their roles, that is collaboration.
Scott Moehring: I agree with that, because if you had a different actor, it would be a different…
Scott Moehring: They would bring something different to it.
Jerry Michalski: Yes, and Mike, this is Mike Lee's particular M.O, his unique M.O. in movie making, and there's maybe a couple other directors that do this, but he relies on it completely.
Jerry Michalski: And I think that it lives up to the spirit of collaboration that you're pointing to.
Scott Moehring: I agree with that, and I think when you are coming into a collaborative… when someone's at the… the reason I brought this up to begin with is I believe when people are asking for collaboration.
Scott Moehring: I don't think that they really want
Scott Moehring: that actor to say, here's what I want. They just want the actor to kind of follow
Scott Moehring: the director's vision, and I don't know if that's true. That's why I asked the question.
Jerry Michalski: I think there's some range of relationships between actors and directors, and each director is quirky in their way, but some directors are really permeable to actors going, no, no, no, I don't think this is working, let's do this instead, and then they're like, go. And other directors are like, yeah, no, you do exactly what I said, and with the nuances that I just gave you.
Jerry Michalski: You know, and the notes, apparently passing notes to people is a thing in movie making.
Jerry Michalski: So, thank you, but we have a whole mess of people in the queue, so Gil.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And other actors and directors start from the premise of, let's invent this together.
Jerry Michalski: Yeah, Mike Lee, that's what I mean.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: like Mike Lee and many others, and I was just watching a conversation last night between Robert Icky and Andrew Scott about the magnificent Hamlet they did at the Almeida theater a few years ago.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Which was very much collabor… I mean, they said, let's work together on something, what should we work on together? And they finally chose Hamlet as the target, and then they invented the play, so, you know, I think that fits with what Scott's talking about, and in my experience, is far more common.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Scott, than maybe in your experience. Whether it's in, you know, human relationships, or people starting companies, or cutting deals, or building united fronts against fascism, or what have you, I think there's been lots of whatever this is in human…
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: experience, but I'm saying whatever this is, because this is feeling like a very problematic conversation, because we're talking about
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: two overlapping things. One is the nature of human interaction.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: For common purpose, and the other is the word labels that we are giving to different types of human
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: interaction.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And I suspect that all of us, many of us may have very different definitions of what collaboration, cooperation, coordination.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: compromise and other things actually mean, so we're… I'm very wary of having a debate about words, where we're using the words in different ways, about meanings of different things that we aren't even clear about, so I don't know where to go with this conversation.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: No.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: I'll stop there.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: say again, like, my experience in life is… seems to be very different than Scott's experience in life about people working together.
Jerry Michalski: Which is, I think, a really interesting thing to explore, given this theme. I like that vector a lot.
Jerry Michalski: Alex.
Alex Kladitis: Right, I think…
Alex Kladitis: By the time I came across it just now, I think you've kind of covered everything. So, my initial
Alex Kladitis: definition or understanding of collaboration is where I work with people on an equal basis to problem solve or whatever, and as a… as a team, or as the interaction between collaborative parties.
Alex Kladitis: gives off new ideas, new tactics, or whatever. So it's different from what I suspect what you guys covered is teamwork.
Alex Kladitis: But I just cheated, and I went to AI, and I said, what are the different types of collaboration?
Alex Kladitis: There's about 30 of them in there. You know, just take a pick. You've mentioned a lot of them.
Alex Kladitis: And my personal thing about collaboration is not the…
Alex Kladitis: who's the chief? Who's this role? Who's that role? It's, you know, it's more like social community goal type of collaboration. It's that end of it. Or, in this case of building products using AI, IT, or whatever.
Alex Kladitis: It's working together to do… it's not a hierarchical thing.
Alex Kladitis: So, anyway, that's basically where I stand on collaboration. And I'm interested in this because
Alex Kladitis: I never thought there was another meaning to it.
Alex Kladitis: like the one Scott put across.
Jerry Michalski: A meta question for this conversation. Is this conversation a collaboration on exploring the word collaboration? But we don't need to answer that right now. Let's go to Jose.
Jose Leal: Thanks for throwing that question into my brain, just to confuse me a little bit more.
Jerry Michalski: we can do.
Jose Leal: So… to, to, Scott's point about,
Jose Leal: the definitions. I, myself, have sort of used a similar defen… two different definitions, but similar to what Scott, is describing, with cooperation and collaboration.
Jose Leal: In corporate, I think most organizations
Jose Leal: Are good at doing cooperation.
Jose Leal: Teams work together, but they do so… independently.
Jose Leal: They don't do it together, right? They're not actually working together. You do your side, I do my side, we pass it along.
Jose Leal: My department passes it to your department, my team passes it to your team, this one individual does some work, passes it to the other individual, so it's very, sort of, linear in the way that it works.
Jose Leal: I, in corporate, rarely saw the… what I call… true collaboration.
Jose Leal: And to me, that means, I think, closer to what Scott's talking about, where we sort of…
Jose Leal: Work TOGETHER in the moment.
Jose Leal: developing something together at the same time, not as a handoff type of situation. You go do your task, I'll go do my task, that kind of thing. And I think that
Jose Leal: You know, having done a bunch of startups and having partners.
Jose Leal: it's rare, I disagree with Gil,
Jose Leal: It's rare that you get that true kind of collaboration.
Jose Leal: Where both parties sort of just… Both or more.
Jose Leal: Sort of drop a lot of their…
Jose Leal: Ego, whatever, whatever it might be, to… to sit down
Jose Leal: Together, and actually let the juices…
Jose Leal: role, and, like, beat off of each other, and support one another, and, like, yeah, I like that idea, let's do this, and I like that, and let's do that, and so that kind of thing, I found, doesn't happen as often as I would have liked in my career. And…
Jose Leal: And that what does happen is more of the cooperation than the collaboration. So that's my view on… that's the language I use. I'm not trying to define anything for anybody, that's just my…
Jose Leal: My experience and definition of…
Jose Leal: Of those terms, and what comes of them.
Jose Leal: In, in true, efforts that I've participated in. That's it.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you.
Jerry Michalski: Kevin.
Kevin Jones: you know, hundreds of social entrepreneurs who were scholarshiped at SoCap, they would use,
Kevin Jones: the word coordination, and I wanted to learn to step back from that, and I buy into Ronald Coase's transaction theory, he's the one that came up with the theory of the firm as well, and he said you start with discovery, who's doing what? Then you find one-off cooperations that work in that instance.
Kevin Jones: And coordination is where signals are automated.
Kevin Jones: like where train tracks are, exchanges are, everybody agrees on the roll, and it's not revisited again. And you get there, you know, when you've decided that the width of the train tracks will be the same, and you don't have to offload from the Vanderbilt's tracks to the folks doing the Erie Canal.
Kevin Jones: You know, coordination requires
Kevin Jones: limitation within accepted limits within those groups, and it's a restraint that causes things to flow easily and quickly. And so I just, you know, when people say, what's coordination? Well, you know, it is where social entrepreneurs express their delusion.
Kevin Jones: Of how they will change the world, and realizing that coordination is
Kevin Jones: The third step after you know who's doing what, and who's doing something like you, and how you explain yourself versus the other folks, and where the differentiation goes.
Kevin Jones: And it also has to be in where you realize who's your partner and who's your stakeholder. Your partners are like the folks in… in…
Kevin Jones: They're working on housing.
Kevin Jones: The stakeholders are folks who have
Kevin Jones: Validation and resources that we want to access.
Kevin Jones: They are not on our team, we're trying to get their resources into our
Kevin Jones: universe of solving this problem of a thousand people lost houses. And so, you know, you have to know who your partners are and who your stakeholders are.
Kevin Jones: And how to get to the folks with power, influence, and resources, to the group that is partnering.
Kevin Jones: And cooperating, and collaborating, partnering and collaborating.
Kevin Jones: I don't see as different. I always work with groups, and Scott does individuals, because I've discovered that, you know, I'm not the on-the-ground person, but I can help the folks who are working figure out the resources and who needs to be at the table.
Kevin Jones: And so, you have to know your role.
Kevin Jones: when you are… you know, I'm… when I tried to solve malaria in Mozambique and Swaziland, I discovered I was uniquely bad as a community organizer.
Kevin Jones: But I was good at getting the resources to the folks doing the work, and I've stopped trying to be the guy on the ground. So you have to know where you work.
Kevin Jones: And I'm extremely effective one step up, and I'm extremely bad.
Kevin Jones: down at the level where I failed at malaria and all the other things where I failed like that. So, that's…
Kevin Jones: I think about this a lot, because I do it a lot.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks for your reflections, Ken.
Jerry Michalski: Doug?
Doug Breitbart: Yeah, so… I… I wanna… I wanna just sort of offer a…
Doug Breitbart: A drop out of the industrial and noun version.
Doug Breitbart: To sort of a slightly more semantic Question and level.
Doug Breitbart: So… Human beings coming together to… co-create together.
Doug Breitbart: Or to, you know, solve a collective challenge together.
Doug Breitbart: for me, that question, Scott, about collaboration.
Doug Breitbart: really tickled something that I've spent a huge amount of time over the last several years
Doug Breitbart: Searching for it, sort of like a truffle.
Doug Breitbart: Which is, is there a paradigmatically different way of relating to co-creating together?
Doug Breitbart: That doesn't have all these industrial age afflictions.
Doug Breitbart: like… ownership.
Doug Breitbart: power over.
Doug Breitbart: Ego.
Doug Breitbart: attachment.
Doug Breitbart: fear.
Doug Breitbart: scarcity. Like, that whole bucket that I just listed…
Doug Breitbart: It's a direct growth out of…
Doug Breitbart: An industrialization, a nouning of the world, and relating to human beings, not as living emotional.
Doug Breitbart: Creatures, but as, you know, machine parts.
Doug Breitbart: And, if you…
Doug Breitbart: float above the industrial one if you let go of all of those drivers, which are all sort of brainstem territory. If you can actually sort of not have those running the show.
Doug Breitbart: Not have those being the contextual ones.
Doug Breitbart: and constraints.
Doug Breitbart: Some really interesting possibilities open up.
Doug Breitbart: And I have actually… so, just to bring rubber to the ground, rubber meeting the road.
Doug Breitbart: So there's a young woman, and I… in, in Nigeria.
Doug Breitbart: She's an attorney, 30 years old. She created a nonprofit foundation to help
Doug Breitbart: Women entrepreneurs, more specifically women coming out of domestic violence situations.
Doug Breitbart: And… Her foundation doesn't relate proprietarily to the women that she helps.
Doug Breitbart: It's sort of a conduit, it's a pipeline, it's a funnel.
Doug Breitbart: And she spends as much time networking with other organizations and entities and agencies and stuff.
Doug Breitbart: that… Connect to those women that she's helping as beneficiaries.
Doug Breitbart: So she's conduit, she's part conduit.
Doug Breitbart: She's part service provider, direct service provider, she's resource intrinsic herself.
Doug Breitbart: And… I think about so many of the nonprofits.
Doug Breitbart: and NGOs that I've crossed paths with that,
Doug Breitbart: Are afflicted with a kind of proprietariness about where the sole source of the help that we're providing to the beneficiaries that we point to, that we're serving.
Doug Breitbart: and they're closed systems, and other NGOs in the same space are competitors, which, again, is back to that industrial
Doug Breitbart: frame and orientation.
Doug Breitbart: So, I really think the inquiry is, can we co-create together, not from scarcity, but from abundance, not from hard boundaries.
Doug Breitbart: and proprietary, you know, assertion of power or authority or control or scarcity around resources and all that stuff. But can we actually come from a place of, you know, of porous boundaries, of openness, of curiosity, of appreciation
Doug Breitbart: of…
Doug Breitbart: The ecosystem of folks that we find ourselves in the middle of because everybody has an affinity around the same things they're trying to solve for.
Doug Breitbart: As a value-added.
Doug Breitbart: So, with that, I'm complete.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you very much for your publications. I love the angle of, can we step outside, sort of, the Western object-noun-oriented thing, ownership thing, and go back to other examples. Scott, feel free to jump in between what anybody says. You've posed the question for us, so I feel like you have free reign to jump in and out whenever you want.
Jerry Michalski: And I just wanna… I just wanna add something as an example of… I think an example of what Doug just gave us, which comes from the book, The Biggest Estate on Earth, How the Aborigines Made Australia, in which Bill Gammage describes how.
Jerry Michalski: Two-thirds of the landmass of Australia was under active human management before the First Fleet arrives, before European convicts and other people arrive.
Jerry Michalski: two-thirds of the place, and basically the tracks were quite mobile, but they were… it's like, when April and I were in Mongolia.
Jerry Michalski: the families that… the half the population lives out on the steppe, half the population is in the one big city, Ulaanbaatar.
Jerry Michalski: People out on the step move 3 times a year.
Jerry Michalski: they have winter quarters, they have sort of different quarters, and they're busy grazing their animals and doing whatever. But in Australia, you would drop some spin effects near the forest. You might thin the forest a little bit, but you knew that kangaroos love spin effects, so if you plant a bunch of spin effects just outside the forest, you know that they're going to be feeding there next time you come around.
Jerry Michalski: And it might be another tribe that catches, you know, some of the kangaroos, and nobody's going to take all the kangaroos, because there's a lot of them.
Jerry Michalski: But you're busy managing all different parts and aspects in complementary ways, with no sense of, there's a fence here, and this plot is mine, and not yours. Like, not at all. It's just like, we're all managing this place, and what's dramatic is that in, I think it's pretty sure it's this book, he describes reading the diaries of the First Fleet.
Jerry Michalski: And he reads the diaries of these gentlemen who bring their horses ashore and start walking… start riding around in the forest, and they're like.
Jerry Michalski: This is like a gentleman's forest. You reach up and there's an apple, you look down and there's a gourd. Oh my gosh, the state of nature in Australia must be very different.
Jerry Michalski: from, you know, England, or whatever. And it's like, yeah, no, that was actually the active, active collaboration, and this is why I'm… I'm raising the question, is this collaboration? These are hands-off, these are people who've developed these practices over possibly 30,000 years.
Jerry Michalski: That seem to work really well, that fail once somebody brings sheep and lets the sheep loose on the landscape by the way.
Jerry Michalski: to go graze. Like, it suddenly dawns on me, oh my god, the sheep on these first ships, go tear up this man-made landscape, and there's no… you can't… you can't really stop them, nobody wants to put fences, because it's not about fences, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, right?
Jerry Michalski: So, it's a fascinating riddle about how do you have a continent as big as Australia that is doing, I think, really pretty well before the first fleets show up.
Jerry Michalski: And… and how do you preserve any of that once capitalism objects, the things that Doug was just critiquing for us.
Jerry Michalski: fall into the space and eat it. They… because… because capitalism is quite voracious.
Jerry Michalski: And doesn't really like to coexist with other systems, so it will, you know, take up all that space. Sorry to go so long, but… but I love the example, and I was very struck when I read about, sort of, Aboriginal practices, and I'm on the quest for how do we steward instead of own?
Jerry Michalski: in modern times.
Jerry Michalski: Right? How do we drag some of this
Jerry Michalski: Forward into today, because it seems to me to be a highly practical abundance creation machine, that is very social and passed from people to people.
Mike Nelson: What was the name of the book again?
Jerry Michalski: It's in the chat, the biggest estate on Earth.
Mike Nelson: Oh, the state, okay.
Kevin Jones: It's a state of Bill Camp.
Kevin Jones: I want to drop in something to actually conflict with where Doug went. He said that nonprofits have an industrial frame. They don't. They have an artificially scarcity-induced mindset by foundation program grants. I was working with a
Kevin Jones: food systems in Oakland, and Kellogg, I think, put up $10 million if they could agree on it, and nobody could, because they all had to report upstream to the
Kevin Jones: program grant manager's theory of change and size of the thing, and so they had to give back the $10 million. And it's, you know, foundations are
Kevin Jones: profoundly dysfunctional. You know, they have no predators and they don't evolve, but they keep cooperation between nonprofits limited because of the oppressiveness of program grants, the colonial nature of program grants. So that's just… it's not industrial, it's the philanthropic industrial complex.
Jerry Michalski: I want to check in with Scott. Do you want to jump in on anything? Otherwise, I'm going to go to Sean.
Scott Moehring: Very quickly, there was a wonderful little side conversation between Jerry and Gil about a jazz combo, and I think it fits with my thesis. I would say a jazz quartet is a collaboration, because if you change the musicians, it changes the outcome, and one of the reasons I say that is that we name the musicians.
Scott Moehring: And in a marching band, we typically do not name the musicians. We name the team. And…
Scott Moehring: So I would say that that, you know, marching band is cooperation and teamwork, but I wouldn't consider it collaboration.
Scott Moehring: And the second thing is, is that I put a…
Scott Moehring: an engram, because I enjoy the engrams, and I started looking at
Scott Moehring: I found it funny that the rise of collaboration, which happened…
Scott Moehring: You know, looks like after the 80s,
Scott Moehring: The rise of the collaboration coincided with the fall of Deadline.
Scott Moehring: And it also coincided with the rise of iterative. So, there might have been some…
Scott Moehring: I know some of you are more involved in the software side of things.
Scott Moehring: you know, it feels like that kind of relates in some way, because I know that
Scott Moehring: One group will get
Scott Moehring: interested in, oh, we're now doing a waterfall model, and then another industry will pick that up, even though they're doing something completely different and doesn't fit. They're using it, and I think my main thing is people using the word collaboration
Scott Moehring: is far greater than the people who are actually collaborating, or actual true collaborative situations. And I don't know if that's true, but that's my thought.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks, Scott.
Jerry Michalski: Sean, thank you for your patience.
Shawn Murphy: When, when Scott made his remarks, last week, I really, I really pricked up because, because I, that, that is strongly my experience, that we're, that we're really challenged to collaborate in a deep way, and, I, I…
Shawn Murphy: Jerry's recent remarks here, and Doug's I deeply resonate with as well. I think, the conditions for profound collaboration are so delicate
Shawn Murphy: And the procedures needed to actually accomplish the development of the shared understandings
Shawn Murphy: And the, and the shared, the shared conception of
Shawn Murphy: What's even the language game that we're playing here together in this moment?
Shawn Murphy: What are we doing now in this conversation?
Shawn Murphy: And what do the words that come out of my mouth and your mouth mean, and which are the same? And even though some of them might be the same, are they… are our meanings, are the meanings that we attach to those, words, sufficiently, equivalent, so that we can move forward without, further, definition, refinement, clarification?
Shawn Murphy: And then, what are our goals? What, what, what are our objectives? What, what do we come to this engagement, offering and asking and, and, intending?
Shawn Murphy: It's such an incredibly subtle dance, and
Shawn Murphy: And I would submit that, that as the number of participants in the conversation grow, there's a violent, cliff
Shawn Murphy: Right after 2.
Shawn Murphy: Pretty big cliff.
Shawn Murphy: Really big cliff, and that was the thing… that was the thing that… that really… that… yeah, Scott, so that was… that was what… that was part of what you were saying, right? And that is a really big issue for me. But after 2, then what happens is that when…
Shawn Murphy: There's a third person who remarks, or, you know, feels a need to participate, or gets impatient, or, you know, takes us off on a tangent, or whatever, then the subtle dance that's going on between a two, is disrupted.
Shawn Murphy: And the… and the mind-mildin that's absolutely critical to the, to the unification of understanding and purpose and intent that is elemental, fundamental to true collaboration is disrupted.
Shawn Murphy: And so… so, in a group of this size, there's… However gifted.
Shawn Murphy: however resonant.
Shawn Murphy: However well-intentioned the participants it's more like a playground, and there's a bunch of stuff that happened.
Shawn Murphy: Rather than, rather than, rather than there really being the possibility of, of the, the deep, harmonization of, of understanding.
Shawn Murphy: That has to be the foundation for, for profound, shared purpose in action.
Shawn Murphy: I have so much more to say, but… boop!
Jerry Michalski: Huh?
Scott Moehring: I'm so excited because that's… you expressed that in a way that I haven't been able to, and that makes me…
Scott Moehring: Excited that we're all talking about this, because.
Jerry Michalski: Yeah.
Scott Moehring: You'll see all the points on the different sides, everyone.
Scott Moehring: has… has… has gauged and engaged in it. And I… I think your cliff is…
Scott Moehring: A brilliant metaphor, so thank you for that.
Jerry Michalski: And when I…
Jerry Michalski: I kind of… I kind of want to disagree and agree with what Sean was just saying, in the sense of…
Jerry Michalski: I think that broader collaborations are sort of rare, and Brian Eno coined the term senius.
Jerry Michalski: for, like, when bands start composing things together, look at the short video clip that I posted in the chat. It's Eno explaining what he meant by seniors. Other people have picked up the term sinus. And sinus is a scene that has genius. It's a… you know, it's a…
Jerry Michalski: Squeezing together of those words, but…
Jerry Michalski: I think that there are moments where there are communities of co-creators that have seniors, it's just that they're kind of precious. And I think that our fear of the cliff
Jerry Michalski: or our… our dread of the Cliff of… the Cliff of Two, as I will dub it, is…
Jerry Michalski: That it's very hard to somehow get a group to cross over into senias. You can't… you certainly can't force it to, and then there's something about that degree of collaboration that involves the dropping of egos.
Jerry Michalski: and the permeability to other people's ideas, which may not… which are not the same thing. I mean, I'm pretty sure the Beatles, individually had pretty big egos.
Jerry Michalski: But they managed to blend their skills and crafts and understandings of what they wanted to make in a genius way. So the Beatles, I think, had seniors, and the things that they composed over time. I think Scott's heads just exploded.
Scott Moehring: It's collective flow. That's what I haven't been able to say.
Jerry Michalski: Okay.
Scott Moehring: collective flow, where you lose… you said it, Jerry, you lose the sense of self.
Scott Moehring: Because you are… It's like, man, we are just… we're… we're in sync.
Scott Moehring: You know, and it's so delicate, and it's so rare, as Sean has said, and my…
Scott Moehring: initial comment was because I feel like we say, no, collaboration is everywhere. And I'm like, no, it's so precious.
Jerry Michalski: Right. And you're basically helping us appreciate and raise the specialness of this kind of collaboration, a word that we would normally just sort of chuck around, so I like that.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you for that gift into this conversation.
Jerry Michalski: Heron Nelson.
Mike Nelson: Just a couple small comments,
Mike Nelson: I do think it's helpful to do what Scott just did, which was distinguish between real-time together activities, and…
Mike Nelson: Longer-term, multi-person collaborations that could be seniors, but may not be synchronous.
Mike Nelson: it may be that, you know, there's a group that's really aligned, and, you know, one person can send an email from Hong Kong, and somebody will pick it up a few hours later in Kenya, and…
Mike Nelson: The… the… the thread, or the…
Mike Nelson: the listserv will just explode with great new ideas that would not be possible with individuals. But I wanted to point to the work that John Seeley Brown did probably 20 years ago.
Mike Nelson: about swarm innovation and swarm manufacturing in China.
Mike Nelson: And he was struck by the fact that you had these Chinese factories that were pumping out Honda motorcycles for the Japanese.
Mike Nelson: They did that by day, and then by night.
Mike Nelson: both the people in the factory and the people in the factories that built the little machine parts that went into the Honda.
Mike Nelson: We're swarming together.
Mike Nelson: And finding ways to make those parts
Mike Nelson: a little cheaper, a little faster, a little better, even make them last longer. And they were producing a Honda knockoff at night.
Mike Nelson: That was half the price and twice as good. It was really funny. It was almost like united by a desire to rip off the Japanese. They were stealing the intellectual property, and they… they didn't have any intellectual property between them. That was… that was…
Mike Nelson: to the point made earlier about IP being a huge barrier.
Mike Nelson: To the selfless sharing of ideas.
Mike Nelson: But I thought their case studies were right on target, and it may be kind of special to that arrangement, and it may be that a lot of other types of collaboration
Mike Nelson: Are not going to be as easy to instigate.
Mike Nelson: Because clearly, in that case, you know, people weren't even meeting face-to-face that much. They were often just…
Mike Nelson: sending over a part and saying, hey, does this… what do you think? This looks better to me. And,
Mike Nelson: Because they were united by common cause and common language and common desire to make more money, they could do it.
Mike Nelson: I don't think that's… just coordination, it seems to me more of a collaboration.
Mike Nelson: The other point I wanted to make, and speaking of the Chinese, there's a brand new book out in the last week called Breakneck.
Mike Nelson: The Chinese Quest to Engineer the Future.
Mike Nelson: And if you don't want to read the book, watch some of the podcasts with the author. They're popping up in lots of places.
Mike Nelson: But the thing that's been getting lots of attention, particularly in the review and the Wall Street Journal.
Mike Nelson: It's his punchline, which was, China… Has put engineers in charge.
Mike Nelson: Who… who want to construct.
Mike Nelson: America has become a lawyerly society.
Mike Nelson: Where the goal is to obstruct.
Mike Nelson: And the book is just full of case after case after case of where the American system has just gotten in its own way.
Mike Nelson: You know, for good goals.
Mike Nelson: You know, we want fairness, we want environmental protection, we want all these things, but we're not doing it in a way that works. We're often giving one lawyer, working for one client, the ability to shut down a $10 billion project for years.
Mike Nelson: And that may be one reason the book's getting lots of attention, but I think the better reason is we should all read it and just be a little bit concerned and scared.
Mike Nelson: About the future of our investment portfolio, if it's basically
Mike Nelson: 80% in American stocks and bonds.
Mike Nelson: Just a thought.
Jerry Michalski: Love that, Bob. Thanks, Mike.
Jerry Michalski: Termin.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Hmm.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: My take on collaboration has to do with… with conversation, and I come at it through that door because, in the…
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: early 2000s, I was looking at, you know, I work with clients who are very skilled, very well-resourced, very intelligent, and very well-intentioned, and yet they're not able to bring in their projects on time and on budget. Why is that? It's not because they lack good intentions, not because they lack skill.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Now, because they lack resources. And when I took my coach training, I was taught a good coach identifies what the person wants to do, and then identifies the competencies that that person needs in order to complete what they want to do.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: So I started to look at teams. I said, these people do not have conversational competency. They don't have the right conversation about the right thing at the right time with the right people.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: So that led me to asking myself, is there a minimum set of conversations that will allow a team to take something
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: From concept through to completion, and if so, what is that? I came up with 4 conversations.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: And what I noticed is that most people start with conversation 3, which is why so many things tend to break down.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Conversation 3 is the one they teach you in business school. It's the coordination of actions. What's the goal? What's the timeline? What's the critical path? How do you allocate resources? Blah blah blah. But if you haven't built relationships, if you haven't explored how to work together in ways that are fulfilling, then you're going to have a lot of problems with that third conversation. So the first conversation is.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Why are we here? What's this…
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: this thing we're attempting to do. Why is it important to you? Jerry, what do you bring to it? Mike, what do you bring to it? Stacy, what do you bring to it? What do you want to get out of it?
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Why are you here? How does it relate to you in a way that actually is part of who you are? And if you're working in a company where you really don't want to be, you're not going to be a good collaborator. So, first you identify what I call, you share what's meaningful.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: And at the end of the shared meaning conversation, everyone has a sense of commonality. You'll also hear things that really don't apply to you, but that's fine, because you've listened very carefully to these are the things that we all agree on are important. And then I usually do some improv exercises, get people's brains warmed up, and explore what's possible. I was working with a bunch of bank
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: bankers, and they're like, we don't have a choice. We have to obey these very stringent rules. And I said, well, what if you could actually step outside those rules? What if you had an unlimited budget, could spend the laws of physics, did some improv exercises.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: They came up with several ways that would allow them to meet the rules and still do the work in ways that would allow them to feel that it was innovative on their part, that it was fulfilling, that it was growing them as people, growing them as professionals.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: This gets into Dan Pink's work on, people want purpose, autonomy, and mastery, right? So you bring that in, and
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: And you generate a bunch of possibilities. And you say, now we do have real-world constraints. We have budgets, we have rules, regulations, so of this cloud of possibilities, which one stands the best chance of succeeding?
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: And you choose that, and everyone has to say, it's not my first choice, but I will work on it. I give it my all, because if you're not, you're a hole draining stuff out. So yes, we're all going to work on that. Then you do the third conversation of coordinating your collective actions, and then the last conversation is the one I always get pushback on. You do an after-action review, which begins with.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: who needs to be acknowledged for their work? And the answer is everyone who contributed.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: If you don't do that, people get very upset. And you look at…
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: What do we do that we can replicate that taught us a good lesson that's really valuable? What did we do that didn't fail, but that did something completely unexpected? I never use the word failure, because failure is a very freighted word, and it evokes things for people that are not pleasant. So, you know, we attempted to do X and think it would bring us to Y, but it brought us to C prime. Why was that? What did we learn from that?
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: And what competencies do we develop as individuals and a team that will serve us? If we're going forward as a team, how can we use what we learned here to be more effective next time? And if we're breaking up and going somewhere else, what are we bringing that we can bring to our next team that will help them?
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: And then you get a nice little learning circle.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: And it's a complete… there are other conversations, but those are the main conversations that coordinate work. This is specifically focused on work. It's not pure dialogue, it's not boomian dialogue, it's like, how are we going to get this done? That's my idea of how you use conversations to collaborate.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Somebody was… Jerry, you were talking about Australia. The same is true of North America, of Turtle Island. The entire continent was completely
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: under care of, you know, they used, slash and ruined agriculture, there were huge forests of perennial, nuts, and I mean, it was an abundance, and the Europeans didn't recognize how the whole continent had been shaped as a food farm. You know, anywhere you went, there was an abundance of food. So…
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: That's a different kind of collaboration. That's a collaboration with the land. That's a collaboration with the living environment that we're all immersed in, that
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: requires way different skills than simply talking together. Although, if you look at Ancient Futures Learning from Ladakh.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: before the road went through into the dock, these people were in such harmony with their environment. It was a very… it would only hold a certain amount of people. If you exceeded that number of people, there'd be famine, there'd be problems. So, they lived very much in balance. Women had
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: multiple husbands, and the husbands spent time in monasteries, so they kept the population low. Everyone had a place to stay, everyone had food in their stomach, everyone had access to education. Then, when the road went through and the West came in, and if you watch, you go to YouTube and you can Google Ancient Futures right from the dock, you can watch her movie.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: You'll see the weak link is the teenage boy. He's the one who says, I don't want to hold hands with my grandma. I don't want to… I don't want to wear traditional clothing. And he's got a pack of marbles rolled up in his t-shirt, and he's trying to look tough and cool, like James Dean, you know, and…
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: That shattered everything.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: The entire irrigation system was designed such that if you were up there and you noticed that some water was draining out, you didn't call Public Works, you went over there and fixed it yourself. That was… you collaborated with the entire community to keep the community intact.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: That was a real commons architecture, and a real collaborative commons architecture. So, I'd go on and on, but that's my take on where I come from on collaboration, and that's just a small part. There's lots more, but I will say one more thing.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: In humanizing the conversation around getting work done, the third part, the third conversation of coordinating actions, I need to know what you look like when you're really stressed.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: You know, you're on your way to work, and you get a speeding ticket, you get to work, and your boss says, I need this done, and then you got a call from the principal's office, and your kid's there, and they want you in there right away. You're now like, oh my god! And if I notice you're stressed, I can come and say, what do you need? How can I help you?
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: I don't ignore you. And so this is really important. You have to decide how we're going to support each other through stressful times, and how we're going to handle conflict, which is another completely separate and yet integrative part of that. So, enough said.
Scott Moehring: I'm gonna jump in just for a moment, please. Ken, that was beautiful. I think this is going to come down as one of those little clips. If you… if you are practiced in saying that, awesome. If that was a… just an awesome riff.
Scott Moehring: it was captured in such a compact and dense, perfect nutshell, you might want to go back and find that. It's like…
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: I've been doing this for 20 years, Scott. I talk about this all the time.
Scott Moehring: Well, okay, it came through. It came through.
Scott Moehring: So, here's a thought, and I think this is relating to…
Scott Moehring: Doug, talking about the humanity of… of this.
Scott Moehring: And… I thought, is there anything that celebrates the human more than a deep, true collaboration?
Scott Moehring: It could be designing a meal together.
Scott Moehring: True respect, Honoring, asking for the unique contribution and experience and perspective of your collaborative partner.
Scott Moehring: That kind of gets at the root of it, in a way, because it's…
Scott Moehring: I can't just have someone who's helping me.
Scott Moehring: do my thing. It's about us, and it's about me seeing you, and honoring you, and integrating your with mine.
Scott Moehring: And, like, how do we do that? And that's why I think it's so…
Scott Moehring: Sean didn't say this, but the word that's coming to mind is intimate.
Scott Moehring: You know, it really is, when you really have that collaborative moment, it's so addictive, because it's like, we all have these walls between us and everyone else, and all of a sudden, that wall isn't there anymore.
Scott Moehring: You know, that's what it feels like to me, is I'm actually seeing another person, and I'm…
Scott Moehring: Taking parts of me and parts of them, and we're creating this third thing.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you. Ken, have you written up or recorded, in particular, the part about the multiple conversations that teams need to have? Have you… is that out in the world someplace?
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: in various places, I really should sit down and…
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: do what I just did here.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: This is a little graphic that I created many years ago, back in 08.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: If you're having trouble coordinating your actions, go back and check, did you… did you choose the right possibility? If you didn't choose it, did you generate it? If you didn't generate it, go back and check your shared understanding.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: So it also works backwards.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: And as I was developing this, I was reading, Difficult Conversations, which is a great book, but it's got 13 steps. I don't know about you, my short-term memory does not handle 13 steps, man. I needed 4, you know?
Jerry Michalski: Thanks, Ken. Thanks a lot.
Jerry Michalski: Gil.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Yeah, good stuff. Scott, the,
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: That example of people cooking a meal together was one that rose in my mind earlier in this conversation.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Because there's a kind of seamless dance that can happen when that happens. And there's also the time when one person just wants to make a meal for everybody else and has a way they want to do it, and that's a gift, too.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: So…
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: you know, wide range of delightfulness and human experience here, and of breakdown and suffering across this whole spectrum. Ken said he could go on at length about this, and he can, because, you know, the name of his business presence includes the word collaborate in it, so this guy's been there a long time.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: On the, and I love the scheme in Kenya, please do, you know.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: craft something here. It's delicious.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: On this step of possibility, though, of asking what's possible here, it's really important that… that…
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: That that be asked in a way that doesn't shut down possibility, and doesn't shut down creativity. And Ken and I hosted last month on Living Between Worlds a wacky guy named Stuart Hill, who's an 82-year-old emeritus professor. I knew him through the regenerative agriculture world decades ago.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And, he's got a bunch of tricks up his sleeve, one of which is, is, well.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: He gathered together a bunch of farmers in Canada to talk about regenerative futures, and had them… there was lectures, and there was discussions, there were small groups, and had people break up in small groups and talk about what they would… what they were doing and what they could do. And he said the… the mood of the room was just really down. It was boring, constrained, the conversations weren't interesting.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: People were taking very limited steps into what they thought was possible.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And they shuffled the groups and asked people to tell the biggest possible lie they could about what they had done in some imagined future.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And the vibe of the room changed completely, and there was laughter and play, and he talks about one guy who said, I, you know, what I did was I ran… I ran a nature strip through my 20,000 acres, and the birds returned, and he, like, he, like, spun a story with life and vibrancy in it that…
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: That showed that he understood the whole ecological framework, that he was not operating his farm, and he had it as a vision, but it wasn't possible until he was invited to lie boldly.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: About it.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And so, we, you know, we did a… we did a show together about lying boldly as a tool for change, and I just want to add that to the question of thinking about what's possible, because you want to… you often want to break that open, because what's possible is constrained by history.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And experience, and, and a fear.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: of imagining.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: So… Thanks, Ken.
Alex Kladitis: Hi, we… can I just make a contribution?
Alex Kladitis: Can you hear me? I don't… I can't hear anyone at the moment.
Alex Kladitis: Sorry, thank you. Sorry, I muted myself. Yes, please, go ahead.
Alex Kladitis: Okay, it's not collaboration, but something Ken said, kind of reminded me something my father told me many moons ago.
Alex Kladitis: So, between… My father was from the island of Rhodes, Rothos, in Greece.
Alex Kladitis: And between… at the end of the First World War, and until the Second World War.
Alex Kladitis: it was given over to the Italians.
Alex Kladitis: And it was… was… belonged to the Ottoman Empire before, then it was given to the Italians, and then became Greek after the Second World War.
Alex Kladitis: So, above the… where my father's village is, is a hill, which was… the Italians took it up and made it into a phenomenal garden place. It was a really beautiful whatever, which has since gone to ruin because…
Alex Kladitis: it was never carried on by the Greeks or whatever, but one thing that resonated with me is not so much collaboration, but
Alex Kladitis: Achievement. Perhaps forced collaboration, but whatever.
Alex Kladitis: And what it was, he said, the Italians had a different way of doing this, looking after the gardens.
Alex Kladitis: They allocated 150 meters of garden and width from the main road. There's a winding road going up.
Alex Kladitis: Every 150 meter… 50 meters was… someone else was responsible for it.
Alex Kladitis: Those are gardeners specific to that, because when Ken said, oh, when there's a problem, he called, I don't know, central departments or whatever. In that case, literally, they had… each person had… now, if you're gonna see the… if you were to see the place, nothing would have happened without collaboration.
Alex Kladitis: But, they were responsible directly for a piece of…
Alex Kladitis: kind of garden, if you like. And apparently they were beautiful, but, that's gone out of the…
Alex Kladitis: that's gone nowhere now. So, I just thought there might be a…
Alex Kladitis: Slice and dice and collaborate aspect to this.
Jerry Michalski: Go ahead, Scott.
Scott Moehring: I was going through my notes from the last meeting where I brought this up, and there were two comments that people had made.
Scott Moehring: That I would like to elaborate on.
Scott Moehring: The first one is Gil.
Scott Moehring: you… I'm going to…
Scott Moehring: probably misquote you here, so I'd like you to correct it if you feel like that's…
Scott Moehring: It's… is… I'm hoping that Gil is still here.
Scott Moehring: It was, collaboration is a skill to develop. That's what I wrote down.
Scott Moehring: And I believe it was part of a larger…
Scott Moehring: comment, and I don't know if you're still there, Gil.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Cheers.
Scott Moehring: So I was wondering if you…
Jerry Michalski: It's in an endless library that just goes back forever.
Scott Moehring: Oh, oh, I'm sorry, I'm seeing your, your note-taker with the dark screen. Okay, my, my…
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: We're both here.
Jerry Michalski: Don't be fooled.
Scott Moehring: So I'm curious if you could elaborate on what you mean by collaboration as a skill to develop, because my thought was, well, if you don't know what collaboration is, how can you
Scott Moehring: develop the skill or know that you're getting better at it, but I'm very curious what your extended thoughts were on that, because it was kind of an offhand comment, I believe, that you made last time.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Maybe you have to know what it is, or maybe you have to have experienced it.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: and say, oh, I like that, I want to do more of that. I think, you know.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: I think Ken spoke very well to some of what developing the skill looks like.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And, you know, that's a framework for cultivating it in a group, or maybe educating people in it, but people also have the experience in real life. In kindergarten, man, you know?
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: That's somewhat what that's about.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And there's…
Scott Moehring: That… that helps. I think that connects to my sense that it's…
Scott Moehring: Rare and precious and delightful, and that you, when you experience it.
Scott Moehring: He's like, oh yeah, I want… more, more, please.
Scott Moehring: Yeah, and there are ways of cultivating relationships and conversations and teams and organizations and so forth that nurture it more or less.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: So there are the skills of collaboration, and there's the meta-skills of cultivating collaboration, in the sense that we're talking about it here. And, you know, I'm struck throughout this whole conversation at how easy it is for us to generalize, about what's so, but the range of human experience is vast around this.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: You know, we have the full spectrum from, you know, from, you know, brutal authoritarian to playful, playful inventing together. They're all there. We've probably all experienced some flavors of many of those.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And so what's interesting is, well, you know, Ken, where are your questions? I want to look at them again. You know, why are we here?
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: What is it that we want? Bob Dunham talks about, for the sake of what, as the question behind every interaction.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And it's usually tacit, and it's sometimes useful to surface it, or at least to be aware of it, because that then provides the basis of, well, you know, if we're here for similar things.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: We care about similar things, even if we have apparent differences.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And this is where the United Front game comes in, in the current, you know, the current political situation pre-yester in the United States, of people who seem to fiercely disagree about certain things, but who actually care
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Very similarly about some things that maybe sometimes possibly provides an opening for collaboration, even across difference.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Which is where it gets really interesting, because we're… if we're… if we're all in agreement on everything, collaboration is one thing, but if we're different, whether in…
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: perspective, or cultural background, or age or gender, or the many different things we can be different on, and still find ways to collaborate around common concerns, that's where human being gets really interesting to me.
Scott Moehring: Yeah, I don't think that we can collaborate if we're both the same.
Scott Moehring: I think it depends on the difference. It is the bringing together of the difference.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: But we're never… we're never the same. We're the same and not the same, right?
Scott Moehring: Yeah, yes.
Scott Moehring: So, what that brought to mind for me is, I think this was the emotion that I was feeling when I initially started thinking about this.
Scott Moehring: I'm frustrated because I hear people using the word collaboration
Scott Moehring: As something of a tease to get other people to work for them.
Scott Moehring: And I think, oh, hey, let's collaborate on this, and I think, okay, that was really fun, I want more of that, I enjoy that experience, this is great. We're gonna do a little mind meld, we're gonna come up with something. And then I show up, and it's like, no, that's not what we're doing at all.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: This is about me wanting you to be part of my thing.
Scott Moehring: And I thought, oh, that's… that's not what I was hoping this was going to be.
Scott Moehring: kia.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: We, we used to have a phrase in my corporate job.
Scott Moehring: I've been partnered.
Jerry Michalski: Hmm, nice.
Scott Moehring: Will you… will you partner with me on this? And it's like, that usually meant that I'm getting screwed, and you're doing the… telling me what to do, but I had to voluntarily say, yes, I will partner with you. And now…
Scott Moehring: Never worked out so well for the one who had been partnered.
Jerry Michalski: Good sign of a dysfunctional culture when you start developing internal jargon like that.
Jerry Michalski: Dave?
David Witzel: And I'm sorry, I'm late, so you guys may have already covered all this stuff, but this is a.
Jerry Michalski: We did, we fixed the whole issue. It's done.
David Witzel: Yeah, you probably have already gotten there, so I'll just put icing on the top or something like that. But Scott, this is, like, a topic I'm really, really curious about, too, is… and I feel like I wonder… I mean, one of the questions is, I don't know whether you guys narrowed the definition of collaboration before I got here or not, but…
David Witzel: But I think Gil's right, we've been doing… I mean, collaboration is, like, what we do, right? And so, whether you want to call it slavery, or the market, or, you know, the assembly line, or… I mean, these are all technologies we've developed for collaboration.
David Witzel: Right? And I would argue…
David Witzel: pretty… pretty well supported, I think, that the, you know, the most effective collaboration we have is the multinational corporation, right? It's hugely successful.
David Witzel: And costs are the lowest, and production is the highest, and, you know, you want something done, get a multinational corporation to do it for you. And so, like, you know, kind of all of the Ezra Klein stuff around abundance is, like, you know, part of what's happened is we've tried to fight back against multinational corporations.
David Witzel: by making… helping little companies and stuff do things, but it turns out they're not as efficient. They're not as good at what they do, you know? And so, you know, we have all these technologies. And I guess what's motivated me the last, you know, couple of decades is that I got all excited about the open collaboration stuff that we were doing at the beginning of the web.
David Witzel: Wikipedia, and Linux, and…
David Witzel: those kinds of things, and so there was a particular category of… of collaboration by choice, or something like that, that I was really interested in.
David Witzel: And I thought, oh, this is the answer to everything, you know? Like, everything will be a wiki. And it turns out, over the last 25 years or 30 years, right, that's not true. There's very few wikis out there that are successful, right? There's very little collaboration, Scott, I'd say, at that level that has been kind of, you know, spontaneously combusted.
David Witzel: And it's like, what the fuck happened? Why was this… why is this so hard? And… and I feel like we… first, for a while, we thought we needed to open things, and so there was, like, a licensing answer, right? If you make it… if you could put a Creative Commons license on it, it'll… that'll be good, right? And now we can collaborate.
David Witzel: But it turns out that's not… that just means it's open. Nobody wants to play with it, because it's, like, I think your point is, it's somebody else's thing. I don't… you know, I'm not gonna rewrite their book.
David Witzel: And… and,
David Witzel: So it's not, you know, so… and that's… the question is exactly, Jill, why did Wikipedia work? But give me an example of the second Wikipedia.
David Witzel: Right? What's another Wikipedia? Right? We have many successful examples in software, I would argue, and I would say the difference in software is there's a business model that explains participation.
David Witzel: Right? I can solve… I can satisfy some of my… I can scratch some of my own itch in a software context.
David Witzel: That motivates me to participate in making the software better. So, the point of collaboration has to be to make an asset better, is my theory.
David Witzel: Right? And we have to have some… some mechanism, right, that motivates my participation in making it better.
David Witzel: And so, for some reason, Wikipedia works, people get excited about making it better.
David Witzel: Boom. Great. And Linux, you know, people… you know, and again, most of Linux contributions are large corporations.
David Witzel: Right? There's a little book, a number of folks who just do it on their own.
David Witzel: But in general, it's large corporations investing because they're going to get benefit from Linux. And software kind of, I think, has that energy. WordPress is a really good example, right? Where you have a lot of collaboration around the platform.
David Witzel: But people make money out of it. They have consulting businesses and stuff. They sell products. There's an ecosystem of profit, basically, that is, that enables it. But…
David Witzel: I think we've done that reasonably rarely, and it seems like a skill set that we really ought to be much, much better at.
Jerry Michalski: So, Dave, you may have peeled back the lid on 3 or 4 cans of worms right there.
Jerry Michalski: I'll let Scott take a start. Scott did start by refining the definition and differentiating collaboration from teamwork.
Jerry Michalski: I'm going to project what Scott might say, and then turn it over to Scott, but… but corporations very much have distinct roles. I think Scott would talk about them as teamwork, where in teamwork, if you can replace somebody with someone else and the output doesn't change.
Jerry Michalski: That's just teamwork, and collaboration requires the individuals to be involved and interchanged so much that the replacement of an individual changes the outcome remarkably. So I think the market and corporations don't fall into collaboration in Scott's definition, but Scott, take it away, please.
Scott Moehring: You nailed it, Jerry, that's perfect. So, the only thing I'll mention is I have that one other thing I want to talk about that came up from the last meeting. However, we have Ken and Doug, who I'm assuming are commenting on what just came, so I don't want to fracture that too much.
Jerry Michalski: Cool, and I also want to mention that next week, I'm attending an event in the Bay Area. I'll be in the Bay Area all next week, actually staying with Dave and Claudia, so thank you, Dave.
Jerry Michalski: And, so anybody who wants to meet up with me in the Bay Area LMK, and let's, let's schedule something. But also, I can start the call next week, but I'm gonna have to hand it off pretty early, and I'm happy to experiment if anybody wants to run OGM next week, so let me know that as well.
Jerry Michalski: Ken, please.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: If someone has something that's related to what Dave just said, please go, because I was going to introduce a different, point here.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Or not.
Jerry Michalski: Go for it.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Okay, I'm a bit of a word nerd, and 30 years ago, I was working on a project where we decided we needed to teach people about conflict resolution, so I went to Etymology Online. Actually, at that point, it wasn't Etymology Online. I went to the dictionary, and I found out that conflict
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: and resolution, when combined, if you look at the roots, it actually means to resolve to be in conflict. And my partner, Gene Dunaway, who Gil Friend knows quite well, and I said, that's a terrible
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: route for this, so we need a different route. So we came up with collaborative reconciliation, and we chose collaborative because to collaborate means to work together.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: That's the first definition. The second definition is to work with the enemy. And so when you have somebody that you perceive as an opponent or an enemy, you need to learn to work with them. This is a different kind of operation than excluding them, because you've got to work with them, they're part of your ecosystem. And reconcile means to make friendly again. So, to work with the enemy to become friends again is the point.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: for me, of anything to do with conflict. If it exacerbates the conflict, it's not resolving it, and if it is helping people to say, oh, you know what, I'm stuck on my point, my ego, my… whatever it is, and I see the validity and legitimacy of this other person's point, even if I don't agree with it, that tends to loosen things up a little bit and lets them move into a different direction in a collaborative way towards some kind of
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Of becoming friends again.
Mike Nelson: What was your alternative to conflict resolution?
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Collaborative reconciliation.
Mike Nelson: I'll do a reconciliation, okay.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: And part of that comes from a tradition Jerry talks about often, which is the Quakers. They have a process,
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: The quickers work on consensus, which doesn't mean…
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: 33 to 1 is a tie. It means if somebody's like, I'm not sure about this, but I won't block it. However, I want to keep grappling with it. They call it grappling, and they keep
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: unpacking and talking until they finally come to some kind of agreement on what that means. And that can be a very long process, which I think is another thing working against us. In a capitalist society, time is money, and so you don't have time. And this is… when I present my model of conversations to potential clients, they always say.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: we don't have time for all that. We've got too much to do. And my comeback is always, how often do you have to redo your work? And they say pretty often. I'm like, well, if you didn't have to redo it, would it be worth your time and investment? Well, yeah, it might. And so that's how I overcome the objection.
Jerry Michalski: I am reminded of Oscar Wilde's
Jerry Michalski: quote, which I can never quite remember,
Jerry Michalski: But I'm going to try to ingrain it now. The problem with socialism is that it takes too many evenings.
Jerry Michalski: this community thing, the thing about collaborating and, you know, building links and learning to trust each other is time-consuming, and there's so many Netflix series you gotta get through, or, you know, World of Warcraft, or Roblox, or whatever, whatever it is, Ron, right?
Jerry Michalski: so, so… So uncomfortable.
Jerry Michalski: Doug.
Doug Breitbart: I… yeah, I just wanted to… to share a…
Doug Breitbart: a take that emerged out of a lot of the work I've been doing with partners over the last few years.
Doug Breitbart: And… If… if there's truly…
Doug Breitbart: sort of, I think to Ken's earlier contribution about if there's truly, you know, shared clarity.
Doug Breitbart: And… and commitment on a personal level.
Doug Breitbart: To the collective mission, whatever that is.
Doug Breitbart: When there's a conflict, Which… which… for me, Isn't about, you know, the… The sort of first tier
Doug Breitbart: polarity involved.
Doug Breitbart: But conflict as in when somebody is triggered.
Doug Breitbart: Because that's usually the… the… the active ingredient.
Doug Breitbart: We developed a practice of… Basically, it's a full stop.
Doug Breitbart: And whatever that was going on, it's a full stop.
Doug Breitbart: And the reason for that is because if somebody was triggered, they just left the team.
Doug Breitbart: They just left whatever the collective endeavor is, and they're now facing it internally.
Doug Breitbart: 100%.
Doug Breitbart: So… We're down a person.
Doug Breitbart: And, it doesn't make sense to proceed down a person And, and… and…
Doug Breitbart: So that person has an opportunity to share.
Doug Breitbart: And to be heard.
Doug Breitbart: It is not an opportunity for anybody to respond, or to try to fix it, or to reflect back, or to do anything. They just get an opportunity to really share, be heard.
Doug Breitbart: There's a pause, and then there's an opportunity for people to ask questions, but those questions are to make sure they got what was shared. They understand
Doug Breitbart: What that person is experiencing, was feeling, and what was triggering to them.
Doug Breitbart: In that, It's… it's related to as a gift.
Doug Breitbart: Because if…
Doug Breitbart: That person was triggered internally, then leaving the risk of that triggering happening again in the future, either with them or somebody else, or somebody external to the organization, is at the expense of the whole endeavor and everybody in it.
Doug Breitbart: So, if we trigger, not constructive or helpful, let's figure out how to take care of that right now, so that at least that triggering
Doug Breitbart: Is off the table.
Doug Breitbart: And the only reason I'm sharing this is because it's a… It affords a recontextualization.
Doug Breitbart: that over time builds strength, builds resistance, builds trust, builds connection. It really deepens the power of the collective.
Doug Breitbart: Because in working through that, in sharing that, in receiving and holding it as a gift to the whole.
Doug Breitbart: It sort of inverts the orientation.
Doug Breitbart: True.
Doug Breitbart: Dissent and disruption.
Doug Breitbart: And I'm not sure how that plugged into this flow, but, it seemed… Something to share. Complete.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks, Doug.
Jerry Michalski: P.
Scott Moehring: Pete, I think you should go, and then I'll introduce this other thing to kind of wrap us up.
Pete Kaminski: Thanks, Scott
Pete Kaminski: Real quick, I wanted to pick up two things I mentioned in chat, and also a little bit expand or build on something Dave said. One of them.
Pete Kaminski: two different kinds of collaboration, which we didn't quite hit on here, which I'm experienced with and I wanted to share about. One of them was… one of the most fun things I ever did was in my 20s, I worked,
Pete Kaminski: selling big software products, and I was a member of a 4- or 5-person sales team. We would meet with a 4- or 5-person purchasing team.
Pete Kaminski: And…
Pete Kaminski: after, same thing pitching to VCs, kind of. After, you know, 5 or 10 pitches together, you kind of knew the way your team worked, and it felt like a collaboration, it felt like a basketball team or a football, soccer team.
Pete Kaminski: Where I knew what I could talk about effectively, and I knew what somebody else could talk about effectively, and vice versa, and we could pass the topic.
Pete Kaminski: And we did it very gracefully and without the other team really knowing what was going on, how we were playing. And they were doing the same thing on the other side. So one of the things that I really enjoyed about that was not only playing positions really well and passing the ball really well, the topics and conversations really well.
Pete Kaminski: But also the fact that we were doing it together.
Pete Kaminski: Some of the most fun I ever had was with a really good purchasing team, and you could… I could kind of see what they were trying to do, and where they were going, and how they were passing the ball, and I kind of couldn't. Some of the things that they were doing were… were ineffable, and something I couldn't really know.
Pete Kaminski: I remember working, one of the teams we worked with, I think, was a big, big, big company like Intel or something like that, and they were, they were digging us on price, and…
Pete Kaminski: I had this sense, I could tell that they were exceptionally professional about their ability to nail somebody on price, and just drive it down and drive it down, like, hey, we're Intel. We can tell you what the price is going to be, and it's going to be much lower than your cost, I'm sorry.
Pete Kaminski: But they played around with us, and we were a little scrappy startup, so we… we fought valiantly, and so they had this… I had this sense of them kind of like.
Pete Kaminski: Like a tiger holding an antelope's neck in its mouth, and they were kind of playing with this.
Pete Kaminski: But they didn't actually crunch down and break our neck. They're kind of like, okay, we get it, you guys are so cute, we're going to pay at least your cost, maybe a little under, maybe a little bit over, but, you know, we're not going to completely screw you, we're not going to kill you.
Pete Kaminski: So that was some of the most fun I had was that dual-level collaboration. Another thing that we… Dave touched on a little bit with open source software, I wanted to mention, especially
Pete Kaminski: much smaller projects, sometimes even 2- or 3-person projects, but sometimes 100-person projects. Open source software, and especially the GitForge pull request kind of collaboration, is another, like.
Pete Kaminski: dramatically wonderful human thing that I've experienced that I think most people don't experience, and I wanted to at least kind of, like, tell it to you and give you a little taste of it.
Pete Kaminski: The way it works is not unlike the sales team, you learn your position, you learn the lingo, you learn the plays, but you learn them in your team, and then you can go to…
Pete Kaminski: an away team that has… knows nothing about you, except that they've learned the same kind of collaboration patterns, the lingo, and the meanings of different words, and how things fit together. You can go over to their GitHub repo, or whatever.
Pete Kaminski: And plug yourself right in. Not like you're a team member, but like you're a full collaborator. You're bringing a way of playing the game. You're looking at what they've built already. You can plug yourself in without talking to them, without knowing who they are, without ever meeting them.
Pete Kaminski: And accomplish meaningful work, and move the…
Pete Kaminski: move the product forward, without… with this very light collaboration. And literally, I've done that over and over, where I go over to a team, and I'm like, hey, I can move the ball down the field this way.
Pete Kaminski: And they're like, wow, I didn't expect that. That's amazing. And…
Pete Kaminski: the signaling, the coordination needed for that is, like, really light touch. It's like, you know, here's a feature, here's my pull request, this is what it addresses, and their thing is…
Pete Kaminski: pretty much tweak this, tweak that if you could, and then looks good to me. LGTM is the way that you… they kind of accept a,
Pete Kaminski: Except a pull request. And it's… it's really cool because it's a deep collaboration, and it's really cool because it's with a team that you don't even know. You don't know where they live in the world, you don't know what they like, what they don't like.
Pete Kaminski: You just know that you're both working together to move this product forward. It's a… it's a wonderful and amazing thing.
Pete Kaminski: Thanks.
Jerry Michalski: Love that. Thank you. Scott, do you mind if Stacy sneaks in before…
Scott Moehring: I… I don't mind, this is… I will make my comment at the end.
Jerry Michalski: Alright.
Stacey Druss: Just real quickly, I just want to throw a marker down, because Doug said he wasn't sure where his comment fits in, so I just want to throw a marker down, because we didn't talk about the notion of
Stacey Druss: you know, getting credit and ownership and property and things like that, and I just want to say that I think what Doug touched upon is this idea of
Stacey Druss: The environment or the work community of a group.
Stacey Druss: And so, at some later date, I think we should talk about that, because what Doug brings up is
Stacey Druss: The feel of when a group works together, of…
Stacey Druss: that interconnectedness, which touches upon what Ken was talking about.
Stacey Druss: And why everybody is there, and what brings them there. So I just wanted to…
Stacey Druss: Highlight that, for lack of a better word.
Stacey Druss: Thank you.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks, Stacey. Gil, quickly?
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Quickly, Pete talking about moving the ball down the court, took me from the metaphor of basketball to the actual game of basketball.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: You know, and I'm struck that how, you know, a player can be traded from one team to another and play on the new team.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: there's something shared. And Kevin, it's not automated by any means, but there's shared language, syntax, ways of moving, and so forth, and yet.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: You still find the teams play in really different ways. The Warriors, at the peak of their game, when they won, I don't know how many championships in a row, there was something almost telepathic and balletic about watching them play.
Kevin Jones: Sure, that was collaboration, not coordination, but anyway, that's fine.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Whatever you want to call it. It was… it was ballet. I mean, you know, I think of the Brazilian…
Kevin Jones: Sure.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Pele was playing, there's something that is able to emerge in how people play together. It's like jazz, there's a common language, there's a common syntax, there's moves that they drill in a very regimented and maybe almost mechanistic way, like a musician learning scales that enable something to emerge.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Both individually as a musician, and together in a jazz combo, or an improv group, or something like that.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: So…
Kevin Jones: So, I just want to bring in… within the collaborations I work in, there's often
Kevin Jones: People you're opposing, and you have to stop them doing bad things.
Kevin Jones: And that hasn't been mentioned. You know, we're working against the Tourism Development Authority that has this new fund set up. They get, you know, in a good year, $40 million from hotel tax, and they won't pay anything for workforce housing.
Kevin Jones: for the people working in hotels, and they've got this fund set up to it, and they just make it more marketing. And so, as we do housing, we're going to have to stop them doing what they're doing with this fund that was set up with one goal, because what they have is seven hoteliers, one
Kevin Jones: Nice, but not very smart.
Kevin Jones: county commissioner, and one citizen who no one listens to. So, I mean, a lot of collaboration. If you want to get stuff done, you have to stop bad things from happening, and you know who they are. And we haven't talked about that at all.
Jerry Michalski: Scott, I think you've got the last word here, and then I'm hoping Ken has a poem for us.
Jerry Michalski: You are still muted.
Scott Moehring: The last word, I'm sorry, is related to a comment that was made last call, where I brought up this idea. And it was something like, if you don't hear things that make you feel uncomfortable.
Scott Moehring: Then your group isn't big enough.
Scott Moehring: And I was thinking about that and the nature of collaboration, and if… is the point to get more and more and more opinions?
Scott Moehring: Or is there a limit to the size of a collaboration that actually is a collaboration? And I'll leave you with that open-ended.
Scott Moehring: But…
Jerry Michalski: Thank you. Like, quicker advices, which they do sometimes at the end of meetings. They'll have, like, queries or advices, which are just things to ponder.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: I can speak to that, Scott.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: there are…
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: I spent a decade of my life developing something called the World Cafe Dialogue Process. The World Cafe Dialogue Process is really great for sharing meaning, it's really great for exploring possibility, it's really great for learning and reflecting, it's terrible for coordinating an action.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Okay? Look at the social brain. Robin Dunbar is one of the authors, two other women from Oxford there. They talk about the Dunbar number.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: When it comes to coordinating action, it's… 5 is optimal.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: And if you have more than 5, then break it into groups of 5 with… break it into groups of 15 with people coming into that group of 5 to coordinate the next ring out. So, yes, there are very definite limits in coordinating action.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Unless it's incredibly clear how people are supposed to act. There's a story about,
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: First Nations people in this country, before the arrival of the Europeans, they would just get a sense that things were out of balance, and so the whole… all these tribes would come together, and they'd spend days listening to each other, and they'd start with listening to the young people.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: And they'd end with listening to the grandparents. Usually the grandmothers had the last word. And they didn't have planning notebooks, and they didn't have strategic plans, but once they'd talked for a few weeks, they knew they were… they could put things back in balance, and they would go back into the world, and things would be in balance until the next time they felt the need. So, there's another…
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: woo-woo layer of collaboration there, of knowing the field, of sensing what's going on in the field there, that most of us have lost contact with. Anyway…
Jerry Michalski: Are you saying they didn't even have whiteboards?
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: They didn't even have whiteboards.
Jerry Michalski: Damn! Oh my god, no dry erase?
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: But occasionally, one warrior would write somebody's name in the snow, just so you know.
Jerry Michalski: In blood or pee?
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Ugh.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: It's a song by.
Jerry Michalski: Check out.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: I still write your name in the snow. It's a great tune, check it out.
Jerry Michalski: Okay.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: I'm gonna read one of my poems. It may actually fit. I call this Conspiracy of Silence.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: It's been quite a while since I was among people where we were all silent together.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: I'm feeling a need to join with such people now.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: I'm feeling a need to be with people who are willing to shut up for a while.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: To be with people… to be with people who want to be quiet.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: People want to be still for a bit.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: I'm feeling a need to be with people who want to resist the impulse to make sudden moves.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: I'm feeling a need to be with people who want to spend more time and effort on understanding than they do on explaining.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: And to those people, I offer this invitation and invocation.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Let us come together in a silence and breathe deeply.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Let us breathe deeply until we can stand with ease inside each of us.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Let us breathe deeply until we can send with ease, connecting each other.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Let us breathe deeply until we can look into each other's eyes and not flinch.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Let us breathe deeply until we can talk about what we see in each other's eyes.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Let us breathe deeply until we can breathe together in peace.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Let us breathe deeply until we can breathe peace into the world, and most of all.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Let us breathe deeply until we can feel the world breathe peace into us.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you, Ken.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you all. Again, next week, if anybody has a thought and wants to run the call, let me know.
Jerry Michalski: And, thank you for another very nice OGM exploration. Really appreciate it.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Ciao.
Kevin Jones: The idea is how to collaborate to oppose.
Scott Moehring: Alright.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Yeah, I think that's a great, great topic. Thanks, Kevin.
Mike Nelson: and a lot.